docs: integrate issuer capabilities into wallet (#11)
eclipse-tractusx/sig-architecture: docs/decision-records/0002_integrate-issuer-capabilities-into-wallet.md

<!--
#######################################################################

Tractus-X - Special Interest Group (SIG) Architecture

Copyright (c) 2025 Contributors to the Eclipse Foundation

See the NOTICE file(s) distributed with this work for additional
information regarding copyright ownership.

This work is made available under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC-BY-4.0) license,
which is available at
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode.

SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-4.0

#######################################################################
-->

# Decision Record: {{ title representing decision }}

## Problem statement

In the current Tractus-X architecture, the wallet ([tractusx-identityhub](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/tractusx-identityhub)) covers holder and verifier capabilities, but issuer capabilities are covered by a separate service ([tractusx-issuerservice](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/tractusx-issuerservice)).

> This separation works well at the present time, where only the CSP is an issuer of VCs.

Author: CSP is pretty core Catena terminology.

> This separation works well at the present time, where only the CSP is an issuer of VCs.

Reviewer: The goal need to be to keep the barrier of entry to any document as low as possible and this is a low hanging fruit:

```suggestion
This separation works well at the present time, where only the Core Service Providers is an issuer of verifiable credentials.
```

> This separation works well at the present time, where only the CSP is an issuer of VCs.

Author: CSP and VC (etc) to be expanded on first occurrence

> However, in the mid- to long-term future, an increasing number of use cases will require regular member companies to also become issuers.

Reviewer: I assume the other way around would always - also in the long run - affect more companies: I mean there will always be more companies which just require wallet functionality and no issuer functionality. If the functionalities would be modularies as you write [down below](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/sig-architecture/pull/11/files#diff-4c2a208c0d219a3cff7a38eb03d3b3521b1f456518d6be68e49b53bc4c4df756R48) that would be mitigated, I assume.
What's the additional resource consumption expected when only running the wallet when after the functionalities of wallet and issuer in [a single service](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/sig-architecture/pull/11/files#diff-4c2a208c0d219a3cff7a38eb03d3b3521b1f456518d6be68e49b53bc4c4df756R47)?
What's the amount of libraries exclusive to the issuer functionalies?

Reviewer 2: I agree with this perspective. Additionally, one could also argue: Including holder and verifier features may introduce additional resource consumption for the issuer. But of couse this would not affect that much companies.

To me, this discussion is fundamentally about whether to maintain a single repository with feature flags or separate repositories for each component. The key question should be: How much do these components share in terms of documentation, functionality, configuration...?

If the overlap is minimal, separate repositories would be preferable, as this would allow independent development and release cycles, reducing coupling between independent components.

The current separation of wallet vs issuer service would require all such member companies to run two separate services.

At the same time, when running many wallet instances, the additional resources required by combining wallet and issuer service will add up and negatively impact scalability.

> This scalability, however, is important for [solution 1 - operator offers wallet as a service](https://github.com/catenax-eV/cx-ex-ssi/blob/main/docs/Issuance/issuance.md#solution-1-operator-offers-wallets-as-a-service), see also roadmap and sig-release items X, Y, and Z.

Author: Planning on that. Private was the only option for now.

> This scalability, however, is important for [solution 1 - operator offers wallet as a service](https://github.com/catenax-eV/cx-ex-ssi/blob/main/docs/Issuance/issuance.md#solution-1-operator-offers-wallets-as-a-service), see also roadmap and sig-release items X, Y, and Z.

Reviewer 3: We should really remove it from there.

Shall we merge first the concept from the multi wallet, and then we can talk about this PR? @evegufy @lgblaumeiser @marcelruland

> This scalability, however, is important for [solution 1 - operator offers wallet as a service](https://github.com/catenax-eV/cx-ex-ssi/blob/main/docs/Issuance/issuance.md#solution-1-operator-offers-wallets-as-a-service), see also roadmap and sig-release items X, Y, and Z.

Author: See #13.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Examples

- At Eclipse Tractus-X users that are not operating the network have the need to issue verifiable credentials for Digital Product Passport: https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/digital-product-pass/tree/main/dpp-verification

- PCF Verification is going also in the same way as the DPP-Verification, and it should provide the common technology ground, so it could keep it easy for regular members of the dataspace issue their product and PCF credentials.
```

## Evaluation criteria

- regular member companies must be able to become issuers without an excessive increase in resource demands
- the tractusx-identityhub must remain scalable and not become unnecessarily resource-intensive

## Possible solutions

{{ briefly summarise all possible reasonable approaches to solving the problem }}

### Solution 1: Integrate issuer capabilities into the tractusx-identityhub.

Issuer capabilities will be added to the tractusx-identityhub, such that it covers features for issuers, holders, and verifiers in a single service.
The distribution will be modularised in such a way that the issuer capabilities can be included if need be and excluded otherwise.

### Solution 2: Keep wallet and issuer separate

### Solution 3: Modularise the tractusx-identityhub, such that it can be spun up in- or excluding issuer capabilities

## Decision: {{ title summarising solution }}

### Rationale

{{ explain why the solution was chosen; where appropriate explain why other solutions were not chosen }}

### Actions

{{ list all actions which will be taken as a direct effect of this decision, e.g. creation of a repository }}

### Consequences

> {{ list all indirect implications of the decision, e.g. deprecation of a component }}

Reviewer 3: Lets not forget to add the footer note....
